As the goods in question were never exported outside India so Section 18(2) is in no way can be applied to these transactions because such international selling is not governed by Section 18(1)
(a) of FER Act.
But such spending of foreign exchange in international trade by an Indian person is not forbidden by Section 19 of FER Act.
If that is so, the appellant cannot be held guilty for Section 18(2) read with Section 18(3) of FER Act, 1973.

It is well known fact that international trade is transacted by spending foreign exchange but the earning of foreign exchange is also made by person resident in India.
There is no law whereby Indian resident is regulated from entering into international trade.

RBI functions as delegated authority of Parliament under FER Act and in this sense of term functions as Controller and Regulator of foreign exchange, hence, the advice of RBI given by aforesaid two letters is required to be accepted when it is totally in consonance with the legal provisions.
It is beyond any stretch of doubt that the decision rendered by the tribunal is on merits.
It is not an adjudication on any technical foundation.
The decision on merits was allowed to rest by the revenue.
There is nothing in the Act to indicate that a finding in an adjudication is binding on the court in a prosecution un- der Section 56 of the Act.
There is no indication that the prosecution depends upon the result of the adjudication.
The finding in one is not con- clusive in the other.
There may appear to be some conflict between the views in Stan- dard Chartered Bank (1) and L.R. Melwani holding that ad- judication proceedings and criminal proceeding are two in-
3 AIR 1970 SC 962 4 AIR 1945 Lah 23 5 (2002) 8 SCC 87 6 (2005) 4 SCC 370 7 (1982) 2 SCC 543 8 (1995) Supp (2) SCC 724 9 (2004) 2 SCC 731 dependent proceedings and both can go on simultaneously and finding in the adjudication proceedings is not binding on the criminal proceeding and the judgments of this Court in Uttam Chand, G.L. Didwania and K.C. Builders wherein this Court had taken a view that when there is categorical finding in the adjudication proceedings exonerating the per- son which is binding and conclusive, the prosecution can- not be allowed to stand.
The judgments of this Court are not to be read as a statute and when viewed from that angle there does not seem any conflict between the two sets of decisions.
It will not make any difference on principle that latter judgments pertain to cases under the Income Tax Act.

21 . Coming to the facts of the case, we find that the tribunal has arrived at a conclusion that the appellant cannot be held guilty for Section 18(2) read with Section 18(3) of FER Act, 1973 and the advise of the Reserve Bank of India given in its letters dated 21.1.1992 and 18.2.1994 deserve to be accepted as they are totally in consonance with legal provisions.
The High Court, without an assail to the order passed by the tribunal, has adverted to the same and opined that it does not subscribe to the view expressed by the tribunal that Section 18(2) and 18(3) of the Act were not applicable to the transaction in question.
The High Court could not have done that.
As we perceive, the judgment of the tribunal is on merits, inasmuch as findings have been recorded after analysis of facts and the conclusion has been arrived at that the appellants have not violated the provisions of the Act.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that it is a judgment rendered on technical grounds and, therefore, we are compelled to hold that the High Court has totally erred in law.

22 . In view of the aforesaid analysis, we allow the appeals, set aside the judgments and order passed by the High Court as well as by the learned Additional Sessions Judge and direct that the order passed by the learned Magistrate discharging the accused persons shall stand restored.

                  S U P R E M E C O U R T O F        
